===========================
Write Operation Performance
===========================

.. default-domain:: mongodb

.. contents::
   :backlinks: none
   :local:

Document Growth
---------------

If an update operation causes a document to exceeds the currently
allocated :term:`record size`, MongoDB relocates the document on disk
with enough contiguous space to hold the document. These relocations
take longer than in-place updates, particularly if the collection has
indexes. If a collection has indexes, MongoDB must update all index
entries. Thus, for a collection with many indexes, the move will
impact the write throughput.

Some update operations, such as the :operator:`$inc` operation, do not
cause an increase in document size. For these update operations,
MongoDB can apply the updates in-place. Other update operations, such
as the :operator:`$push` operation, change the size of the document.

In-place-updates are significantly more efficient than updates that
cause document growth. When possible, use :doc:`data models
</core/data-modeling>` that minimize the need for document growth.

Indexes
-------

After every insert, update, or delete operation, MongoDB must update
*every* index associated with the collection in addition to the data
itself. Therefore, every index on a collection adds some amount of
overhead for the performance of write operations. [#exceptions]_

In general, the performance gains that indexes provide for *read
operations* are worth the insertion penalty. However, in order to
optimize write performance when possible, be careful when creating new
indexes and evaluate the existing indexes to ensure that your queries
actually use these indexes.

For indexes and queries, see :doc:`/core/query-optimization`. For more
information on indexes, see :doc:`/indexes` and
:doc:`/applications/indexes`.

.. [#exceptions] For inserts and updates to un-indexed fields, the
   overhead for :ref:`sparse indexes <index-type-sparse>` is less than
   for non-sparse indexes. Also for non-sparse indexes, updates that
   do not change the record size have less indexing overhead.
