=========
Use Cases
=========

The use case documents provide introductions to the patterns, design,
and operation used in application development with MongoDB. Each
document provides more concrete examples and implementation details to
support core MongoDB `use cases`_. These documents highlight
application design, and data modeling strategies (*i.e. schema
design*) for MongoDB with special attention to pragmatic
considerations including indexing, performance, sharding, and
scaling. Each document is distinct and can stand alone; however,

The *real time analytics* case studies describe applications that
collect machine generated data from logging systems, application
output, and other systems. The *E-commerce* case studies address
aspects of applications required for building product catalogs, and
managing inventory in e-commerce systems. The *content management*
case studies introduce basic patterns and techniques for building
content management systems using MongoDB.

.. _`example use cases`: http://www.10gen.com/use-cases

Real Time Analytics
-------------------

As an introduction to the use of MongoDB for real-time analytics
storage and use,
":doc:`/use-cases/real-time-analytics-storing-log-data`" document
describes several ways and approaches to modeling and storing machine
generated data with MongoDB. Then,
":doc:`/use-cases/real-time-analytics-pre-aggregated-reports`"
describes methods and strategies for processing data to generate
aggregated reports from raw event-data. Finally
":doc:`/use-cases/real-time-analytics-hierarchical-aggregation`"
presents a method for using MongoDB to process and store hierarchical
reports (i.e. per-minute, per-hour, and per-day) from raw event data.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   use-cases/real-time-analytics-storing-log-data
   use-cases/real-time-analytics-pre-aggregated-reports
   use-cases/real-time-analytics-hierarchical-aggregation

E-Commerce
----------

MongoDB's flexible schema makes it particularly well suited to storing
information for e-commerce websites and solutions. The
":doc:`/use-cases/ecommerce-product-catalog`" document describes
methods and practices for modeling and managing a product catalog
using MongoDB, while the
":doc:`use-cases/ecommerce-inventory-management`" document introduces
a pattern for handling interactions between inventory and users'
shopping carts. Finally the
":doc:`/use-cases/ecommerce-category-hierarchy`" document describes
methods for interacting with category hierarchies in MongoDB.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   use-cases/ecommerce-product-catalog
   use-cases/ecommerce-inventory-management
   use-cases/ecommerce-category-hierarchy

Content Management Systems
--------------------------

The content management use cases introduce fundamental MongoDB
practices and approaches, using familiar problems and simple
examples. The ":doc:`/use-cases/cms-metadata-and-asset-management`"
document introduces a model that you may use when designing a web site
content management system, while ":doc:`/use-cases/cms-storing-comments`"
introduces the method for modeling user comments on content, like blog
posts, and media, in MongoDB.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 2

   use-cases/cms-metadata-and-asset-management
   use-cases/cms-storing-comments
