=======
Indexes
=======

.. default-domain:: mongodb

Overview
--------

Use the :method:`~db.collection.ensureIndex()` method to create an
index on a collection. Fundamentally, indexes in MongoDB are similar to
indexes in other database systems. Without indexes, MongoDB must scan
every document in a collection to find documents that match the query
condition.

Consideration
-------------

The :method:`~db.collection.ensureIndex()` only creates an index if the
index does not exist. MongoDB automatically creates an index on the
``_id`` field upon the creation of a collection.

By default, all indexing operations block until the MongoDB finishes
building the index.

.. include:: /includes/examples/example-gs-index.rst

Analyze Query Plan
------------------

MongoDB provides the :method:`~cursor.explain()` method to return
information on the query plan of a particular query. The query plan is
the plan the server uses to find the matches for a query. This
information may be useful when optimizing a query. Append the
:method:`~cursor.explain()` method to the
:method:`~db.collection.find()` method to return information on the
query plan.

See :manual:`Analyze Query Plan Tutorial
</tutorial/analyze-query-plan>` for an example.

Additional Information
----------------------

MongoDB provides several different index types to support different
kinds of queries and data sets. See :manual:`Index Types Overview
</core/index-types>` for the different index types supported in MongoDB.

You can also specify various properties for indexes, such as a *unique
constraint*. See :method:`~db.collection.ensureIndex()` to view the
options available.

See the :manual:`Indexes Section </indexes>` in the MongoDB Manual for
complete documentation of the indexes in MongoDB.
