========
Sharding
========

.. index:: background; sharding
.. _sharding-background:

MongoDB provides an automatic sharding feature that distributes a
single logical database system across a cluster of machines. MongoDB
uses range-based portioning to distribute :term:`documents <document>`
in a single collection between members of a shard cluster based on a
specific ":term:`shard key`.

For a high-level introduction to the underlying concepts and operation
of sharding, consider ":doc:`/core/sharding`." To understand how
sharding works and to use sharding in your deployment, to read
":doc:`/administration/sharding-architectures`" document provides an
overview of basic system architectures.

Administrators of shard clusters should also read the
":doc:`/administration/sharding`" document. This resource contains a
catalog of procedures for configuring and maintaining shard clusters,
in addition to a :ref:`troubleshooting <sharding-troubleshooting>`
section to aid in diagnosing common issues with sharding. Use the
:ref:`sharding tutorials <sharding-tutorials>` for instructions on
complete administrative operations.

Finally, for details on MongoDB's internal operation of sharding, the
":doc:`/core/sharding-internals`" document addresses these underlying
concepts.

Documentation
-------------

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 3

   core/sharding
   core/sharding-internals
   administration/sharding
   administration/sharding-architectures

.. index:: tutorials; sharding
.. _sharding-tutorials:

Tutorials
---------

The following tutorials outline basic administrative process for
deploying and managing shard clusters:

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   tutorial/deploy-shard-cluster
   tutorial/add-shards-to-shard-cluster
   tutorial/remove-shards-from-cluster

Additionally, the :doc:`/tutorial/enforce-unique-keys-for-sharded-collections`
tutorial describes a sharding-specific application development
pattern.

.. STUB tutorial/replace-one-configuration-server-in-a-shard-cluster
.. STUB tutorial/replace-all-configuration-servers-in-a-shard-cluster
